README.md, before:

# Web-server todo workshop

During this workshop you'll get to know some async Rust, some webserver-handling and some database-persistence.
Afterwards, you'll hopefully have enough to go on to get started with your own project.

## Getting started

You'll be gradually supporting more and more of our wanted "To do"-api. The pre-code comes with a set of tests to help you gradually solve the problems,
so after each test, you can run `cargo test` to run the tests and see if you've completed the assignment or not.
Or if you want to run specific tests, run with a prefix of the test path: `cargo test part1`.

## Requirements

At the end, you'll have the following:

- A HTTP-webserver running locally on port 8080
- The following endpoints
  - `GET /todos` - returns all todos
  - `GET /todos/:id` - returns a specific todo
  - `POST /todos` - Add a new todo, where the todo is a JSON-encoded body
  - `POST /toggle/:id` - Toggle a todo id to complete/uncomplete the todo. Each todo has a unique id
  - `PUT /todos` - Update a todo with new information
- Todos are persisted between server runs
- Persistence is done with SQLite

## Assignments

### 1. Health check

Add an endpoint that just returns the status code `200 OK` on the path `/`

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Start by opening the `./src/lib.rs`-file, and add an empty handler:

```rust
async fn empty() {}
```

It needs to be async as Axum expects async handlers.
Then you need to add the handler to the router in the `app`-function:

```rust
pub fn app(_db_path: String) -> Router {
    Router::new()
        .route("/", get(empty))
}
```

Ignore the `_db_path`-argument, it will be used later.
Run your tests, that's it! Empty handlers implicitly return a successful status code.

</details>

---

### 2. List todos

Add an endpoint that lists all todos, as a JSON-encoded response. The path of the endpoint should be `/todos` and should accept the `GET`-method.

💡 Tip: This endpoint just needs to return an empty list for now, we don't actually have any todos to return yet.

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Add a function called `todos` (or whatever you like, the name doesn't matter). Make the return-type `Json<Vec<Todo>>`. This tells Axum to serialize the return value to JSON, add some info about the content encoding as an header, a return type, etc. Just return an empty vector for now, which will be inferred as a correct type, wrap it in a `Json`-constructor:

```rust
async fn todos() -> Json<Vec<Todo>> {
    Json(Vec::new())
}
```

Register the handler in the router:

```rust
Router::new()
    .route("/", get(empty))
    .route("/todos", get(todos))
```

</details>

---

### 3. Add a todo

#### 3.1 Accept a todo

Add an endpoint that accepts a JSON-encoded todo and returns `201 Created` and an empty response on creation.

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Accepting JSON is quite simple, really. Just create a handler with a signature where the last argument is a type `T` wrapped in `Json<T>` to deserialize the input as JSON. The deserialized value is wrapped in the constructor `Json`, so you can deconstruct and extract your value directly:

```rust
async fn create_todo(Json(todo): Json<Todo>) { }
```

This will not pass the test, however, because a non-failing response returns `200 OK`, not `201 Created`.
Add a return value of `impl IntoResponse`, which means something that can be turned into a response. In our case, we just want to return a status code without a body, so we'll return 201:

```rust
async fn create_todo(Json(todo): Json<Todo>) -> impl IntoResponse {
    StatusCode::CREATED
}
```

And then add it to the router:

```rust
Router::new()
    // other routes
    .route("/todos", post(create_todo))
```

</details>

### 3.2 In-memory shared storage

Add app state to store the todos in-memory while the server is running.

This will be tested by creating a todo through the previous endpoint, and fetching it through the first.

💡 Tip: if you're getting difficult to read error messages when registering handlers (unfortunately common), add a temporary `#[axum_macros::debug_handler]` and compile again for a more descriptive error message!

First, create a shared state. Axum expects it to be clonable and shared among threads, so wrapping the state in `Arc`, makes sense, but you'll also need exclusive access to the list when pushing new todos. You'll need to wrap the list in another layer of a concurrency locking primitive, something that will give you _mutually exclusive_ access between threads.

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

**Shared state**

Create a struct `AppState` to store your state, make it cloneable using a derive-macro. Add your vector of todos inside.

```rust
#[derive(Clone)]
struct AppState(Vec<Todo>);
```

This alone will make your data cloned between threads, but won't work because it will mutate state on a single thread and would give data races. Mutually exclusive access can be done through a `Mutex` or some other lock. `std` provides an implementation, but so does tokio, which supports async and doesn't block the thread.

Using a `Mutex` would be a fine solution, however we know that our program will be highly concurrent with many readers and few writers, so a read-write lock would be preferrable, instead of locking other readers out while reading todos:

```rust
#[derive(Clone)]
struct AppState(Arc<RwLock<Vec<Todo>>>);
```

**Register the state**

To register a shared state, simply add `with_state` to your router. Remember that the state applies to all routes registered above it, so if you register a route that needs the state beneath the `.with_state`-call, you'll get a confusing error.
Initialize an empty state and register it as such:

```rust
let app_state = AppState(Arc::new(RwLock::new(Vec::new())));
Router::new()
    // other routes
    .with_state(app_state)
```

**Adding shared mutable state to handlers**

Now we need to modify our handlers to actually add the todos and extract them on the getter.
In Axum, type-safety is important, however the error messages are not always easily understood. If you arrange extractors of input data (form data/json) and shared state extractors the wrong way, you get a confusing error message. However, adding `#[axum_macros::debug_handler]` to your handlers will make them significantly easier to debug.

Modify the post handler to be as such:

```rust
async fn create_todo(
    State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>,
    Json(todo): Json<Todo>,
) -> impl IntoResponse {
    let mut todos = todos.write().await;
    todos.push(todo);
    StatusCode::CREATED
}
```

And your getter to be as such:

```rust
async fn todos(State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>) -> Json<Vec<Todo>> {
    Json(todos.read().await.to_vec())
}
```

And that's it!

</details>

---

### 4 Fetching a specific todo

Add an endpoint that fetches a specific todo. Make sure to return 400 on nonexisting todos. The endpoint should be on the form `/todos/123` for the todo with id 123

💡 Tip: Handlers can return results, returning different things upon success or errors

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Add a handler which extracts a reference to the shared state, and also a path to extract the id:

```rust
async fn get_todo(
    State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>,
    Path(id): Path<u32>,
)
```

On success, we want to return the JSON-encoded todo, but on failure we want to return 400 Bad request (it may not be exactly the best return code, but let's forget about that for a while). Change the signature to add a return type:

```rust
async fn get_todo(
    State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>,
    Path(id): Path<u32>,
) -> Result<Json<Todo>, StatusCode>
```

In the body, we want to get a reader lock to the todos and find the specific todo. If we don't find a todo, map it to a result with the error as a status-code and the ok value as a JSON-encoded todo. It can actually be done as a one-liner like this:

```rust
todos
    // Get reader-lock future
    .read()
    // Await it, while not blocking the thread
    .await
    // Create an iterator over the todos, returns references
    .iter()
    // Find the specific id
    .find(|todo| todo.id == id)
    // Convert from an Option<&T> to Option<T> by cloning it
    .cloned()
    // Map the option to a result where the error value is a status code
    .ok_or(StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST)
    // Wrap the Ok-value in the Json-constructor
    .map(Json)
```

Add the handler as a route, using `:id` to signify a path variable:

```rust
Router::new()
    // other routes
    .route("/todos/:id", get(get_todo))
    .with_state(app_state)
```

</details>

---

### 5. Toggling todos

Add an endpoint that toggles the completion of a todo using `POST /toggle/:id` as the path and method. Return 400 on an invalid todo id and 200 with an empty body on success.

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Add an endpoint with the same arguments signature types as the previous, returning a `StatusCode`:

```rust
async fn toggle(State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>, Path(id): Path<u32>) -> StatusCode
```

The body is similar to the previous, and can be mostly pipelined:

```rust
let toggled = todos
    // Get a writer-lock
    .write()
    .await
    // Iterate over the list mutably
    .iter_mut()
    // Find the specific todo
    .find(|todo| todo.id == id)
    // Toggle its completion state if found
    .map(|todo| todo.completed = !todo.completed);

// Return the appropriate status code
if toggled.is_some() {
    StatusCode::OK
} else {
    StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST
}
```

And register the handler:

```rust
Router::new()
    // other routes
    .route("/toggle/:id", post(toggle))
```

</details>

---

### 6. Update a todo

Add an endpoint that accepts an update to a specific todo's text/name and completion status, using `PUT /todos`. The endpoint should accept a todo as JSON-encoded input and return 200 on success, and 400 on error.

💡 Tip: Remember the update struct-syntax: `Todo { new_value: something, ..old_todo }`

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Add a handler with the following signature:

```rust
async fn update_todo(
    State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>,
    Json(updated_todo): Json<Todo>,
) -> StatusCode
```

Now we just need to find the todo, update it, and return the correct status code:

```rust
let updated = todos
    .write()
    .await
    .iter_mut()
    // Find the todo
    .find(|todo| todo.id == updated_todo.id)
    // It's safe replacing the entire todo as the id is the same, but you could also use the update syntax `*todo = Todo { id: todo.id, ..updated_todo}`
    .map(|todo| *todo = updated_todo);

if updated.is_some() {
    StatusCode::OK
} else {
    StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST
}
```

Add it as a route:

```rust
Router::new()
    // other routes
    .route("/todos", put(update_todo))
```

And that's it!
Also, note that you can merge routes that share the same path in a more terse way:

```rust
Router::new()
    .route("/todos", get(todos).post(create_todo).put(update_todo))
```

Is the same as

```rust
Router::new()
    .route("/todos", get(todos))
    .route("/todos", post(create_todo))
    .route("/todos", put(update_todo))
```

</details>

---

### 7. Database persistence

This is a big one (🍕), not gonna lie.
If you get stuck or just want a quick solution, use the provided database-layer functions in [`./src/solutions/db.rs`](./src/solutions/db.rs).

Note, the following solutions are a quick way to get to the solution, but we do almost no error-handling and is **not** how you would do it in a professional setting. Error-handling is left as an exercise to the reader 😅

### 7.1 Stop "persisting" stuff in the memory

Storing the todos in memory makes the server useless if restarted.
We'll use [rusqlite](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/) as a database library, which provides an easy to use SQLite API. However, since it is not designed to be used in an async setting, we'll use the async wrapper created by Tokio: [`tokio-rusqlite`](https://docs.rs/tokio-rusqlite/)

1. Start by replacing your `Arc<RwLock<Vec<Todo>>>` in the app-state with a connection to a database from `tokio-rusqlite`. A `Connection` is cloneable in itself, so maybe you don't need all that locking?

2. Create a connection to the database in the `app`-function, using the provided path. Use the provided `solutions::db::create_todos_table`, or if you _really_ want to, create your own, to create the todos table before the server starts.

3. Use the connection as a shared state throughout your program.

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

**1. Replacing the shared state**

This one is simple, just apply this diff:

```diff
-struct AppState(Arc<RwLock<Vec<Todo>>>);
+struct AppState(Connection);
```

It will work because the connection itself is `Clone`, which is what Axum does when sharing state between handlers. We could have used `Arc` here, but cloning the connection is cheap.

**2. Create the database and table**

Creating a database is simple, as using `Connection::open(path)` creates a database if it doesn't exist, by default:

```rust
pub async fn app(db_path: String) -> Router {
    let connection = Connection::open(db_path).await.unwrap();

    // Ensure table exists
    db::create_todos_table(&connection).await;
    // ...
}
```

**3. Use the connection as a shared state**

This is the easiest:

```diff
-    let app_state = AppState(Arc::new(RwLock::new(Vec::new())));
+    let app_state = AppState(connection);
```

Even the function signatures at the handler-site doesn't need to be changed, but this name-change is nice for readability:

```diff
-async fn toggle(State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>, Path(id): Path<u32>) -> StatusCode {
+async fn toggle(State(AppState(connection)): State<AppState>, Path(id): Path<u32>) -> StatusCode {
```

Of course, we'll need to change the usages, but onwards. Unfortunately, there aren't any tests for the steps within this part of the workshop.

</details>

### 7.2 Create the db-layer functions

You can, and I sort of want you to, skip this step. It's just fiddly, takes time, is error-prone, but trying from A to Z teaches you a lot!

_If you want to skip this part, just go to the next part and use `solutions::db` instead of `db`._

Create the following helper-methods with the following signatures (if you want it to work the same way as the workshop):

- `async fn create_todos_table(connection: &Connection)`: Runs the [`create_todo_table.sql`](./src/solutions/create_todo_table.sql)-statement to create the `todos`-table
- `async fn insert_todo(connection: &Connection, todo: Todo)` - Inserts a todo into the table (accept a id, don't worry about generating an id)
- `async fn get_todo(connection: &Connection, id: u32) -> Option<Todo>` - Selects a todo and returns a single todo from the db
- `async fn get_todos(connection: &Connection) -> Vec<Todo>` - Returns all todos from the db as a vector
- `async fn update_todo(connection: &Connection, updated: Todo) -> Result<(), ()>` - Updates a todo in the database, can be used both for the `POST /toggle/:id`-endpoint and the `PUT /todos`-endpoint

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Just look at the solutions-file, please. The error-handling is really bad, and at some places I unwrap, while at others I return an error. I know.

If you want to create your own methods, add the file `src/db.rs` and add `mod db;` to `lib.rs`.

</details>

### 7.3 Update the handlers

Now, use all the methods you added for the db-layer and update the handlers to all interact with the database.

💡 Tip: You can essentially remove all the locking-stuff now

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Update each handler to use the db-functions from before.

**Note**: If you skipped the previous step, add the following to the `lib.rs`-module to use the provided db-methods: `use solutions::db;`.

The following is the body of each handler after the update:

`todos`:

```rust
let todos = db::get_todos(&connection).await;
Json(todos)
```

`create_todo`:

```rust
db::insert_todo(&connection, todo).await;
StatusCode::CREATED
```

`get_todo`:

```rust
let todo = db::get_todo(&connection, id).await;
todo.ok_or(StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST).map(Json)
```

`toggle`:

```rust
// Since we don't have the todos in memory anymore,
// let's fetch the existing todo from the db and then reinsert it
// And yes, a SQL statement to do this in-db would probably be better, but I didn't want to figure out how to toggle a boolean with SQL in SQLite
let maybe_todo = db::get_todo(&connection, id).await;

if let Some(todo) = maybe_todo {
    let toggled = db::update_todo(
        &connection,
        Todo {
            completed: !todo.completed,
            ..todo
        },
    )
    .await;

    if toggled.is_ok() {
        StatusCode::OK
    } else {
        StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST
    }
} else {
    StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST
}
```

`update_todo`:

```rust
let updated = db::update_todo(&connection, updated_todo).await;

if updated.is_ok() {
    StatusCode::OK
} else {
    StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST
}
```

And that's it! Run `cargo test` to run all tests and see that they pass, which they hopefully should!

</details>

## Conclusion

Hopefully you have gained some insight into how easy it is to get started with servers in Rust. Sometimes even easier than other languages. The database-step is probably the worst, but so is it in most other languages, too.

If you'd like, you can check out the [`tests/todos.rs`](./tests/todos.rs)-file to see how each test is done, too. Testing in Axum is surprisingly easy.

Hope you had fun! 😃

Commit message:

Add notes on workshop structure

README.md, after:

# Web-server todo workshop

During this workshop you'll get to know some async Rust, some webserver-handling and some database-persistence.
Afterwards, you'll hopefully have enough to go on to get started with your own project.

## Getting started

You'll be gradually supporting more and more of our wanted "To do"-api. The pre-code comes with a set of tests to help you gradually solve the problems,
so after each test, you can run `cargo test` to run the tests and see if you've completed the assignment or not.
Or if you want to run specific tests, run with a prefix of the test path: `cargo test part1`.

## Requirements

At the end, you'll have the following:

- A HTTP-webserver running locally on port 8080
- The following endpoints
  - `GET /todos` - returns all todos
  - `GET /todos/:id` - returns a specific todo
  - `POST /todos` - Add a new todo, where the todo is a JSON-encoded body
  - `POST /toggle/:id` - Toggle a todo id to complete/uncomplete the todo. Each todo has a unique id
  - `PUT /todos` - Update a todo with new information
- Todos are persisted between server runs
- Persistence is done with SQLite

## Assignments

Since this workshop has a few tests set up, it is easier to split the project up into a library and a binary, where having a library makes it more testable. The library part is `./src/lib.rs` and the binary is `./src/main.rs`, so you can just do your edits in the library to make tests pass.

### 1. Health check

Add an endpoint that just returns the status code `200 OK` on the path `/`

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Start by opening the `./src/lib.rs`-file, and add an empty handler:

```rust
async fn empty() {}
```

It needs to be async as Axum expects async handlers.
Then you need to add the handler to the router in the `app`-function:

```rust
pub fn app(_db_path: String) -> Router {
    Router::new()
        .route("/", get(empty))
}
```

Ignore the `_db_path`-argument, it will be used later.
Run your tests, that's it! Empty handlers implicitly return a successful status code.

</details>

---

### 2. List todos

Add an endpoint that lists all todos, as a JSON-encoded response. The path of the endpoint should be `/todos` and should accept the `GET`-method.

💡 Tip: This endpoint just needs to return an empty list for now, we don't actually have any todos to return yet.

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Add a function called `todos` (or whatever you like, the name doesn't matter). Make the return-type `Json<Vec<Todo>>`. This tells Axum to serialize the return value to JSON, add some info about the content encoding as an header, a return type, etc. Just return an empty vector for now, which will be inferred as a correct type, wrap it in a `Json`-constructor:

```rust
async fn todos() -> Json<Vec<Todo>> {
    Json(Vec::new())
}
```

Register the handler in the router:

```rust
Router::new()
    .route("/", get(empty))
    .route("/todos", get(todos))
```

</details>

---

### 3. Add a todo

#### 3.1 Accept a todo

Add an endpoint that accepts a JSON-encoded todo and returns `201 Created` and an empty response on creation.

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Accepting JSON is quite simple, really. Just create a handler with a signature where the last argument is a type `T` wrapped in `Json<T>` to deserialize the input as JSON. The deserialized value is wrapped in the constructor `Json`, so you can deconstruct and extract your value directly:

```rust
async fn create_todo(Json(todo): Json<Todo>) { }
```

This will not pass the test, however, because a non-failing response returns `200 OK`, not `201 Created`.
Add a return value of `impl IntoResponse`, which means something that can be turned into a response. In our case, we just want to return a status code without a body, so we'll return 201:

```rust
async fn create_todo(Json(todo): Json<Todo>) -> impl IntoResponse {
    StatusCode::CREATED
}
```

And then add it to the router:

```rust
Router::new()
    // other routes
    .route("/todos", post(create_todo))
```

</details>

### 3.2 In-memory shared storage

Add app state to store the todos in-memory while the server is running.

This will be tested by creating a todo through the previous endpoint, and fetching it through the first.

💡 Tip: if you're getting difficult to read error messages when registering handlers (unfortunately common), add a temporary `#[axum_macros::debug_handler]` and compile again for a more descriptive error message!

First, create a shared state. Axum expects it to be clonable and shared among threads, so wrapping the state in `Arc`, makes sense, but you'll also need exclusive access to the list when pushing new todos. You'll need to wrap the list in another layer of a concurrency locking primitive, something that will give you _mutually exclusive_ access between threads.

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

**Shared state**

Create a struct `AppState` to store your state, make it cloneable using a derive-macro. Add your vector of todos inside.

```rust
#[derive(Clone)]
struct AppState(Vec<Todo>);
```

This alone will make your data cloned between threads, but won't work because it will mutate state on a single thread and would give data races. Mutually exclusive access can be done through a `Mutex` or some other lock. `std` provides an implementation, but so does tokio, which supports async and doesn't block the thread.

Using a `Mutex` would be a fine solution, however we know that our program will be highly concurrent with many readers and few writers, so a read-write lock would be preferrable, instead of locking other readers out while reading todos:

```rust
#[derive(Clone)]
struct AppState(Arc<RwLock<Vec<Todo>>>);
```

**Register the state**

To register a shared state, simply add `with_state` to your router. Remember that the state applies to all routes registered above it, so if you register a route that needs the state beneath the `.with_state`-call, you'll get a confusing error.
Initialize an empty state and register it as such:

```rust
let app_state = AppState(Arc::new(RwLock::new(Vec::new())));
Router::new()
    // other routes
    .with_state(app_state)
```

**Adding shared mutable state to handlers**

Now we need to modify our handlers to actually add the todos and extract them on the getter.
In Axum, type-safety is important, however the error messages are not always easily understood. If you arrange extractors of input data (form data/json) and shared state extractors the wrong way, you get a confusing error message. However, adding `#[axum_macros::debug_handler]` to your handlers will make them significantly easier to debug.

Modify the post handler to be as such:

```rust
async fn create_todo(
    State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>,
    Json(todo): Json<Todo>,
) -> impl IntoResponse {
    let mut todos = todos.write().await;
    todos.push(todo);
    StatusCode::CREATED
}
```

And your getter to be as such:

```rust
async fn todos(State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>) -> Json<Vec<Todo>> {
    Json(todos.read().await.to_vec())
}
```

And that's it!

</details>

---

### 4 Fetching a specific todo

Add an endpoint that fetches a specific todo. Make sure to return 400 on nonexisting todos. The endpoint should be on the form `/todos/123` for the todo with id 123

💡 Tip: Handlers can return results, returning different things upon success or errors

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Add a handler which extracts a reference to the shared state, and also a path to extract the id:

```rust
async fn get_todo(
    State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>,
    Path(id): Path<u32>,
)
```

On success, we want to return the JSON-encoded todo, but on failure we want to return 400 Bad request (it may not be exactly the best return code, but let's forget about that for a while). Change the signature to add a return type:

```rust
async fn get_todo(
    State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>,
    Path(id): Path<u32>,
) -> Result<Json<Todo>, StatusCode>
```

In the body, we want to get a reader lock to the todos and find the specific todo. If we don't find a todo, map it to a result with the error as a status-code and the ok value as a JSON-encoded todo. It can actually be done as a one-liner like this:

```rust
todos
    // Get reader-lock future
    .read()
    // Await it, while not blocking the thread
    .await
    // Create an iterator over the todos, returns references
    .iter()
    // Find the specific id
    .find(|todo| todo.id == id)
    // Convert from an Option<&T> to Option<T> by cloning it
    .cloned()
    // Map the option to a result where the error value is a status code
    .ok_or(StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST)
    // Wrap the Ok-value in the Json-constructor
    .map(Json)
```

Add the handler as a route, using `:id` to signify a path variable:

```rust
Router::new()
    // other routes
    .route("/todos/:id", get(get_todo))
    .with_state(app_state)
```

</details>

---

### 5. Toggling todos

Add an endpoint that toggles the completion of a todo using `POST /toggle/:id` as the path and method. Return 400 on an invalid todo id and 200 with an empty body on success.

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Add an endpoint with the same arguments signature types as the previous, returning a `StatusCode`:

```rust
async fn toggle(State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>, Path(id): Path<u32>) -> StatusCode
```

The body is similar to the previous, and can be mostly pipelined:

```rust
let toggled = todos
    // Get a writer-lock
    .write()
    .await
    // Iterate over the list mutably
    .iter_mut()
    // Find the specific todo
    .find(|todo| todo.id == id)
    // Toggle its completion state if found
    .map(|todo| todo.completed = !todo.completed);

// Return the appropriate status code
if toggled.is_some() {
    StatusCode::OK
} else {
    StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST
}
```

And register the handler:

```rust
Router::new()
    // other routes
    .route("/toggle/:id", post(toggle))
```

</details>

---

### 6. Update a todo

Add an endpoint that accepts an update to a specific todo's text/name and completion status, using `PUT /todos`. The endpoint should accept a todo as JSON-encoded input and return 200 on success, and 400 on error.

💡 Tip: Remember the update struct-syntax: `Todo { new_value: something, ..old_todo }`

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Add a handler with the following signature:

```rust
async fn update_todo(
    State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>,
    Json(updated_todo): Json<Todo>,
) -> StatusCode
```

Now we just need to find the todo, update it, and return the correct status code:

```rust
let updated = todos
    .write()
    .await
    .iter_mut()
    // Find the todo
    .find(|todo| todo.id == updated_todo.id)
    // It's safe replacing the entire todo as the id is the same, but you could also use the update syntax `*todo = Todo { id: todo.id, ..updated_todo}`
    .map(|todo| *todo = updated_todo);

if updated.is_some() {
    StatusCode::OK
} else {
    StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST
}
```

Add it as a route:

```rust
Router::new()
    // other routes
    .route("/todos", put(update_todo))
```

And that's it!
Also, note that you can merge routes that share the same path in a more terse way:

```rust
Router::new()
    .route("/todos", get(todos).post(create_todo).put(update_todo))
```

Is the same as

```rust
Router::new()
    .route("/todos", get(todos))
    .route("/todos", post(create_todo))
    .route("/todos", put(update_todo))
```

</details>

---

### 7. Database persistence

This is a big one (🍕), not gonna lie.
If you get stuck or just want a quick solution, use the provided database-layer functions in [`./src/solutions/db.rs`](./src/solutions/db.rs).

Note, the following solutions are a quick way to get to the solution, but we do almost no error-handling and is **not** how you would do it in a professional setting. Error-handling is left as an exercise to the reader 😅

### 7.1 Stop "persisting" stuff in the memory

Storing the todos in memory makes the server useless if restarted.
We'll use [rusqlite](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/) as a database library, which provides an easy to use SQLite API. However, since it is not designed to be used in an async setting, we'll use the async wrapper created by Tokio: [`tokio-rusqlite`](https://docs.rs/tokio-rusqlite/)

1. Start by replacing your `Arc<RwLock<Vec<Todo>>>` in the app-state with a connection to a database from `tokio-rusqlite`. A `Connection` is cloneable in itself, so maybe you don't need all that locking?

2. Create a connection to the database in the `app`-function, using the provided path. Use the provided `solutions::db::create_todos_table`, or if you _really_ want to, create your own, to create the todos table before the server starts.

3. Use the connection as a shared state throughout your program.

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

**1. Replacing the shared state**

This one is simple, just apply this diff:

```diff
-struct AppState(Arc<RwLock<Vec<Todo>>>);
+struct AppState(Connection);
```

It will work because the connection itself is `Clone`, which is what Axum does when sharing state between handlers. We could have used `Arc` here, but cloning the connection is cheap.

**2. Create the database and table**

Creating a database is simple, as using `Connection::open(path)` creates a database if it doesn't exist, by default:

```rust
pub async fn app(db_path: String) -> Router {
    let connection = Connection::open(db_path).await.unwrap();

    // Ensure table exists
    db::create_todos_table(&connection).await;
    // ...
}
```

**3. Use the connection as a shared state**

This is the easiest:

```diff
-    let app_state = AppState(Arc::new(RwLock::new(Vec::new())));
+    let app_state = AppState(connection);
```

Even the function signatures at the handler-site doesn't need to be changed, but this name-change is nice for readability:

```diff
-async fn toggle(State(AppState(todos)): State<AppState>, Path(id): Path<u32>) -> StatusCode {
+async fn toggle(State(AppState(connection)): State<AppState>, Path(id): Path<u32>) -> StatusCode {
```

Of course, we'll need to change the usages, but onwards. Unfortunately, there aren't any tests for the steps within this part of the workshop.

</details>

### 7.2 Create the db-layer functions

You can, and I sort of want you to, skip this step. It's just fiddly, takes time, is error-prone, but trying from A to Z teaches you a lot!

_If you want to skip this part, just go to the next part and use `solutions::db` instead of `db`._

Create the following helper-methods with the following signatures (if you want it to work the same way as the workshop):

- `async fn create_todos_table(connection: &Connection)`: Runs the [`create_todo_table.sql`](./src/solutions/create_todo_table.sql)-statement to create the `todos`-table
- `async fn insert_todo(connection: &Connection, todo: Todo)` - Inserts a todo into the table (accept a id, don't worry about generating an id)
- `async fn get_todo(connection: &Connection, id: u32) -> Option<Todo>` - Selects a todo and returns a single todo from the db
- `async fn get_todos(connection: &Connection) -> Vec<Todo>` - Returns all todos from the db as a vector
- `async fn update_todo(connection: &Connection, updated: Todo) -> Result<(), ()>` - Updates a todo in the database, can be used both for the `POST /toggle/:id`-endpoint and the `PUT /todos`-endpoint

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Just look at the solutions-file, please. The error-handling is really bad, and at some places I unwrap, while at others I return an error. I know.

If you want to create your own methods, add the file `src/db.rs` and add `mod db;` to `lib.rs`.

</details>

### 7.3 Update the handlers

Now, use all the methods you added for the db-layer and update the handlers to all interact with the database.

💡 Tip: You can essentially remove all the locking-stuff now

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Update each handler to use the db-functions from before.

**Note**: If you skipped the previous step, add the following to the `lib.rs`-module to use the provided db-methods: `use solutions::db;`.

The following is the body of each handler after the update:

`todos`:

```rust
let todos = db::get_todos(&connection).await;
Json(todos)
```

`create_todo`:

```rust
db::insert_todo(&connection, todo).await;
StatusCode::CREATED
```

`get_todo`:

```rust
let todo = db::get_todo(&connection, id).await;
todo.ok_or(StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST).map(Json)
```

`toggle`:

```rust
// Since we don't have the todos in memory anymore,
// let's fetch the existing todo from the db and then reinsert it
// And yes, a SQL statement to do this in-db would probably be better, but I didn't want to figure out how to toggle a boolean with SQL in SQLite
let maybe_todo = db::get_todo(&connection, id).await;

if let Some(todo) = maybe_todo {
    let toggled = db::update_todo(
        &connection,
        Todo {
            completed: !todo.completed,
            ..todo
        },
    )
    .await;

    if toggled.is_ok() {
        StatusCode::OK
    } else {
        StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST
    }
} else {
    StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST
}
```

`update_todo`:

```rust
let updated = db::update_todo(&connection, updated_todo).await;

if updated.is_ok() {
    StatusCode::OK
} else {
    StatusCode::BAD_REQUEST
}
```

And that's it! Run `cargo test` to run all tests and see that they pass, which they hopefully should!

</details>

## Conclusion

Hopefully you have gained some insight into how easy it is to get started with servers in Rust. Sometimes even easier than other languages. The database-step is probably the worst, but so is it in most other languages, too.

If you'd like, you can check out the [`tests/todos.rs`](./tests/todos.rs)-file to see how each test is done, too. Testing in Axum is surprisingly easy.

Hope you had fun! 😃
